Leadership for building high performing Teams: 

The first and foremost requirement for a high performance team to exist is a conducive environment. 
And it requires right kind of leadership in order foster such an environment where high performing teams can flourish. 

Few very basic leadership requirements for such existence are: 
Trust and Empowerment. 

To me, very core and fundamental of leadership is a zeal and passion in someone to do something good for others without necessarily seeking benefit for the self. To me this is the very start of leadership in a person. From this start, how much good a person is able to create really depends upon their passion , zeal, abilities, skills , putting effort in right direction and also so called fortune or luck. 

To me, you start to become a leader the moment you start thinking about others. 
Leadership should not be looked upon as binary like someone is a leader or someone is not. 
Rather it can be measured as on some kind of scale. Number of people you are able to impact and bring benefit is the scale of your leadership. You could be a leader spouse in your family bringing good to your family. You could be a leader team lead if you are able to upskill your team , mentor them and enable them to perform better. You start becoming a larger leader as you are able to impact multiple teams, customers, users and stakholders. 

To me an organisation is collection of its Investors, Vendors, Customers or users, Management and Employees. An organisation is successful if all these parties connected with the organisation are able to benefit from it in a balanced way. A good professional organisation leader brings this balance and ultimately provides results where Investors are able to get return on their investments, Customers and users are happy using the products and services and are able to do more of what they need to do, Vendors are able to thrive and Management and employees are able to lead a good happy healthy life along with reasonable remunerations and benefits. 

To run an organisation is to create a balance. As the organisation becomes larger and larger you need leaders who can scale to those numbers. Whose vision is equally broader. They can think big. When organisation is small (which means number of customers/users, employees, vendors and other impacted parties) is small then leader has to be of that scale. 

While a leader needs many skills dependending upon the size of the organisation, people it impacts, type of products and/or services it provides, markets/geographies it operates in etc, at the core of this leadership is the desire to ensure you are able to pass benefits to all these parties while you are also able to compete with other players in the market. 

Without this core desire to ensure that you are building a larger eco-system where everyone is happier, healthier and is able to benefit you cannot even start as a good leader whatever kind of skills and experience you possess. Because once this intention is central to your thought process you can then make several decisions. You can pass on your thoughts to others and make them inclusive. You need to hide less and involve a larger pool of people in your mission. Your mission becomes simple and clear. 

When you make such a mission by heart and you truely mean it and you are not there just for some numbers or cards or show business then you will see that in the ups and downs of your business your partners will stand with you and support you. You may have a situation where customers will be okay with certain concessions in your services, your investors are okay with diminished returns and your employees are offering to work more for less. However, for all these things to happen you need to be genuine, transparent and be able to bring yourself and your vulnerabilities in front of everyone. 

When your employees, vendors and stakholders know that they are working in an environment where we are looking for good for all in a balanced way and only competing with outside forces, they all will come together as a team and will give you your heart and soul to win the wars and battles. 

To me, this becomes the very first and foremost condition of building an organisation with high performing teams. In such an organisation you work from one person to another person, from one heart to another heart connecting each other in the mission and the vision that you lay out. You become a listening leader because now you know that everyone here is for a single cause and single mission. Everyone here is thinking of how to succeed. You have multiplied your power exponentially. 

To me, this is what i call creating an environment of Trust and Empowerment. Initially, this may sound hard, however, if you think deeply and you will find that this is probably the easiest option to do. Once you establish this culture across your teams and organisation, it frees you from so many things where you may not want to spend your energy. You may not need to monitor your people anymore. 

Just like nothing is binary and can be measured on a scale gradually, Trust and Empowerment are not binary as well. It will not happen that today you have 0 Trust and Empowerment and from tomorrow you will create 100 Trust and Empowerment. Its a gradual process. Its like how you delegate. You take each step cautiously and carefully and find one leader at a time whom you can Trust more and Empower more. You may even have to select and re-select your staff and leaders since you may find that some are not trustworthy as well. I take a high trust approach to start with and as i put my confidence in my people, i see that in most cases I am able to trust them. 

Its not a skill. And its not something that can come easy to you in case you don't have it. That's what distinguishes a good leader from not a good one. It starts from the top and goes till bottom. 
