This above picture depicts at a very layman level how the service passes from leadership to customers. 

An org structure is created so that a small set of leaders can influence their employees to go and serve their customers. 

This is a simplified version. However, in reality there are many layers of managers and departments (e.g. between engineering and customers there are cloudops, support and services departments that colludes the picture). So in reality the picture becomes complex and difficult to understand what essentially an organization is trying to achieve. 

Good leaders like to serve their employees so that they employees can serve your customers. 

Not so good leaders and control freak leaders, want their employees to serve them and they think they are better off serving the customers which is clearly not scalable. 

The more leaders give their heart and soul out to their employees the more employees will end up caring for your customers, products and services. 

Leaders who are self focused want to be in front of their customers (so that they can grab as much credit as possible). They will be in the front when there are customer escalations and critical project deliveries. They will show case to next level of leadership that they are the ones who are calling all shots. 

Servers are the people who may sit behind and their lowest level possible employees run the show. They will let them come in the limelight. However in certain environment they will seen as redundants and overheads :). These are typical givers in book 'Give and Take' who apparantly don't succeed well. 

The more you serve your employees, more they will serve your customers. 

More often than not, your employees are sacrificing their family lives, personal lives, work-life-balance even health to serve your customers. Why would they do that if they do not get enough charge back from their leaders ? Leaders have to give their hearts and soul to them as well. 

A good leader / giver will definitely come on the top but at times it may take longer. 