Leadership as a Specturm

-- has not been run through chatGPT.
As i mentioned earlier, Leadership should not be looked upon as a binary trait. (In fact none of the psychological traits are binary in nature). It should rather be looked upon as a spectrum. One one end of this specturm is a person who is completely self-centered and does not even blink or care about what others think, do or how do they survive. On the other end of the specturm you will find a large scale leader who has deeply impacted lives of millions of people even through centuries. Rest of us all lie somewhere in between these two extremes. 

Where do you want to find yourself on this spectrum ? What's your journey ? What's the legacy you want to leave ?

Leader believes in "Existence beyond this tangible physical life". If this is not something that goes with your ethos and belief then one thing you can do is just experience being benevolent to others. Bring a smile to a child or do something for someone and experience the happiness. With repeated such instances you will realise that this happiness is larger than the happiness you would get by buying something for yourself. Of course, in this world you need to maintain some balance. Also, remember by not being selfish you are being sacredly selfish.

<Can this be proven with some research and can some evidences be attached to this?>

There are three dimensions to your leadership from this aspect. 
1. Depth of impact you create on someone's life 
2. # of people in whose life you are able to make such impact 
3. Time duration through which this impact is sustained 

Converting this into a mathmatical formula: 
Leadership = Sum(di * ni)

From this equation perspective, a leader is a larger leader who is able to leavel very deep impact in lives of millions of people vs a leader who is able to create a shallow impact in few people's lives. Each of these are leaders but between this spectrum lies all other leaders. 

In an organisation you do not have to be a saint like very large leader. Even if you restrict span of your influence to your team that is a good start for you. This does have a selfish objective behind it however, we would call it more like sacred selfishness. When you are sacredly selfish you are not letting go of immediate results of something but rather wait for a larger return for the good you do for a longer period of time. 

Using this formula, you can practice above teaching as an exercise and now over a period of time as you experience its results you can then start expanding your net of influence. In a few years, you can find that it has become your belief and now you have faith in this understanding. This will transform you into a different person all together over a period of few years. 

When we talk about returns we just don't talk about monetary returns. Sometimes for such service you will get rewarded in your career with money and bigger title. But you will also experience that you are now becoming a more happier, content and fulfilled person. In fact, i call it practicing spirituality in business world. 

To me the practical or business world is a playground where we can test our spirituality and even cultivate it without being a saint and without donning saffron cloths. Soon you will find that this connects with your purpose beyond this life and in fact this is something you were looking for all around. People who are able to reach such stage are the right kind of leaders for your organisation. A leader who believes in this experience, is now looking for like minded people. People who really from their hearts like to do good to others and have ability to do good to others. 

Please note, while many people want to do good to others and have that intent, they really do not have capability to do so. To develop capability to be able to manage an organisation of 100 people you really have to go through lots of grill in life. You have to acquire many skills, technical knowledge, process understanding, business acumen. Not everyone might have done that and this is where you will not look for this intent and ability to sustain such impact. I will not get into hiring for high performance teams yet, but this is where you will start distinguishing between transferable skills/experience vs non-transferable skills/experience. And you will spot the right kind of people. You will also have to be careful about con artists, who will exhibit as if they want to change the world and are ready to give up everything of their own however to find the truth you will have to really get to the bottom of it and we will talk about such examples in a later chapter. 
