Leadership for building high performing Teams: 

The first and foremost requirement for a high performance team to exist is a conducive environment. 
And it requires right kind of leadership in order foster such an environment where high performing teams can flourish. 

Few very basic leadership requirements for such existence are: 
Trust and Empowerment. 

To me, very core and fundamental of leadership is a zeal and passion in someone to do something good for others without necessarily seeking benefit for the self. To me this is the very start of leadership in a person. From this start, how much good a person is able to create really depends upon their passion , zeal, abilities, skills , putting effort in right direction and also so called fortune or luck. 

To me, you start to become a leader the moment you start thinking about others. 
Leadership should not be looked upon as binary like someone is a leader or someone is not. 
Rather it can be measured as on some kind of scale. Number of people you are able to impact and bring benefit is the scale of your leadership. You could be a leader spouse in your family bringing good to your family. You could be a leader team lead if you are able to upskill your team , mentor them and enable them to perform better. You start becoming a larger leader as you are able to impact multiple teams, customers, users and stakholders. 

To me an organisation is collection of its Investors, Vendors, Customers or users, Management and Employees. An organisation is successful if all these parties connected with the organisation are able to benefit from it in a balanced way. A good professional organisation leader brings this balance and ultimately provides results where Investors are able to get return on their investments, Customers and users are happy using the products and services and are able to do more of what they need to do, Vendors are able to thrive and Management and employees are able to lead a good happy healthy life along with reasonable remunerations and benefits. 

To run an organisation is to create a balance. As the organisation becomes larger and larger you need leaders who can scale to those numbers. Whose vision is equally broader. They can think big. When organisation is small (which means number of customers/users, employees, vendors and other impacted parties) is small then leader has to be of that scale. 

While a leader needs many skills dependending upon the size of the organisation, people it impacts, type of products and/or services it provides, markets/geographies it operates in etc, at the core of this leadership is the desire to ensure you are able to pass benefits to all these parties while you are also able to compete with other players in the market. 

Without this core desire to ensure that you are building a larger eco-system where everyone is happier, healthier and is able to benefit you cannot even start as a good leader whatever kind of skills and experience you possess. Because once this intention is central to your thought process you can then make several decisions. You can pass on your thoughts to others and make them inclusive. You need to hide less and involve a larger pool of people in your mission. Your mission becomes simple and clear. 

When you make such a mission by heart and you truely mean it and you are not there just for some numbers or cards or show business then you will see that in the ups and downs of your business your partners will stand with you and support you. You may have a situation where customers will be okay with certain concessions in your services, your investors are okay with diminished returns and your employees are offering to work more for less. However, for all these things to happen you need to be genuine, transparent and be able to bring yourself and your vulnerabilities in front of everyone. 

When your employees, vendors and stakholders know that they are working in an environment where we are looking for good for all in a balanced way and only competing with outside forces, they all will come together as a team and will give you your heart and soul to win the wars and battles. 

To me, this becomes the very first and foremost condition of building an organisation with high performing teams. In such an organisation you work from one person to another person, from one heart to another heart connecting each other in the mission and the vision that you lay out. You become a listening leader because now you know that everyone here is for a single cause and single mission. Everyone here is thinking of how to succeed. You have multiplied your power exponentially. 

To me, this is what i call creating an environment of Trust and Empowerment. Initially, this may sound hard, however, if you think deeply and you will find that this is probably the easiest option to do. Once you establish this culture across your teams and organisation, it frees you from so many things where you may not want to spend your energy. You may not need to monitor your people anymore. 

Just like nothing is binary and can be measured on a scale gradually, Trust and Empowerment are not binary as well. It will not happen that today you have 0 Trust and Empowerment and from tomorrow you will create 100 Trust and Empowerment. Its a gradual process. Its like how you delegate. You take each step cautiously and carefully and find one leader at a time whom you can Trust more and Empower more. You may even have to select and re-select your staff and leaders since you may find that some are not trustworthy as well. I take a high trust approach to start with and as i put my confidence in my people, i see that in most cases I am able to trust them. 

Its not a skill. And its not something that can come easy to you in case you don't have it. That's what distinguishes a good leader from not a good one. It starts from the top and goes till bottom. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Books on building of High-Performing work culture: 

https://corporatecompass.in/blog/top-7-books-on-creating-high-performing-work-culture/
Everybody Matters 
Dare to Lead 
Leader Eat Last 
PowerFul 
Work Rules 
The Culture Code 
Conscious Capitalism 





Building a Culture of Trust and Empowerment: 
- Our People Matter. 
- 

Culture = Values + Behaviors (Lr Gen. George Flynn USMC) 

Process for Establishing Culture of High-Performing:
1. Core Value Identification & Articulation — Designing and facilitating offsites or workshops for leaders and teams 
     to align on core values and associated norms, mindsets, and behaviors

2. Ensuring leaders model and encourage value-driven behaviors

3. Developing culture campaigns that inspire employees to live core company values

4. Embedding values throughout talent management processes, practices, and tools, and every touchpoint that impacts the employee experience

At whatever level of leadership you are at, in your organisation you can start from there. Definitely, if the top leadership in your organisation is aligned with this culture, you would probably not even need this book. Your role as a leader start where not necessarily you have the complete environment conducive to a high performance team but you take a lead and start establish it for the circle of your influence. This would then become your diffentiator and identity. Also, understand this would not be easy, since you will be fighting so many battles while trying to establish these. 

e.g. you may believe in giving ultimate freedom to your teams in terms of what times they work and from where they work. However, your organisation may not align with this and may not have empowered you enough to implement these measures. In such situation, you will have to find that fine balance where within the given constraints you give as much freedom to your teams and people as you can. Your messaging in such instances also has to be transparent and clear. I mostly communicate in my teams, that i don't necessarily support these organisation measures however we are working in a larger organisation and there are so many parameters that are to be considered. Looking at these parameters following policies are derived and now we all have to follow these. I am bound to follow these. However, within the constraints of these policies how much flexibility i can provide, i am ready to provide. I support my people, i consider their specific situations and take accordingly measures. 

There was an instance where a particular request comes to me where one resource wants to take 2 weeks work from home for a specific festivals. The manager comes to me with particular request, can i allow this person such benefit. My question to this person was, how would you handle if all of your people come to you with similar request at different times of the project. Would you be able to fairly grant similar benefits to everyone without causing problem to other players in your team and blaming you for unfairness. 

So as a leader, its my job to let the manager think of such scenarios in broader perspectives and then help them make decisions. Ultimately, i let my engineering managers make these decisions but i only guide them by asking questions towards different scenarios they might face. 

I also nudge them, what if other managers come to me with same request. How do you think i should handle the same. And then such situations become easy for my team to arrive at answers by themselves. The organisation has made its policies clear e.g. as manager/leader i can allow upto 2 weeks of WFH. Beyond that, it has to be approved by HR. Now such policies are created to handle a very large organisation fairness and equity across all teams. So i cannot question these policies however, within these policies how i can empower and trust my teams is within my control. 

The other policy that my organisation recently came up with is of spending at least 6.5 hours in the office. Now, i as an engineering leader has to handle it very tactfully. I know and understand who in my teams are spending how much time and where. I know engineers in my team who are working more than 10 hours and are available all the time. I do know people who are not as committed as others. So now as a leader i have to play a balancing role between these policies and empowering my people and teams. When you are working in an organisation you will always be faced with such challenges and balancing times. You will never have that utopia that your leaders will trust and empower you 100%. If you have landed in such an organisation then my advice to you is to never leave such an organisation and give your 100%. For me, it has been a rare occasion to having worked for such a team.  

Many a times leaders would be faced with this delimma, oh my organisation is not providing all these flexibilities to me. How and why do i need to be nice to my people on these aspects and what is my ROI for providing such a leadership. Well, my answer to this question is that this is your USP. This is your leadership. And your rewards will be a more loyal, sticky and high performing workforce. Which would mean you will have to handle less of escalations and less of follow ups. Your team will rise up to the most occassions and take care of those deadlines which are critical for customer to communicate. These are not just theoritical concepts rather practical experiences that i have experienced in my own career. When i provide such little empowerments and trust to my workforce they always answer it back with higher productivity and dedication to their work. 

Another instance, i would like to state is where when i was talking to a junior engineer outside my organisation. He is now forced to work all attend office all 5 days and was bit frustrated at this reduction of his freedom. But he was saying that i do think there is a benefit of going to office. I remember there were instances when i am at home and some friend or guest will come and i will attend to them rather than doing my work during office hours. Now that i am in office, i can fully concentrate on work. 

My response to him was, first of all, if you work under me, i would not care when you attend to your friends or guest during work hours. I have no problem with that. A good manager knows what tasks he/she has given to you and knows that this work will be done by such and such time. Then what is my challenge weather a specific time you are working or not. Also, if you know that your manager trusts you would you not sit later in the day and complete your work ? I said , as a leader, i want my people to enjoy this freedom and control on their own lives. I want them to feel its your work , its your business and so long as you are getting it done i have no concern with specific timing of it. 

To me, all these practices over a period of time start falling in micromanagement. When you start managing timing of your employees and not the work and outcome, you are slowly drowning yourself in the pit of micromanagement. Now your attention is gone away from value driven approach to doing something that does not add any value to your business directly. Your employees slowly start feeling like they are being schooled and they feel relieved so long as they can prove it to you that they worked for 8 hours. Their responsibility ends with this metric and now they are relieved of all business outcomes and benefits they were supposed to bring as team. Because now they will say that i did my 8 hours and i did exactly what you asked me to do. Why should i care if this team is profitable or not ? 

However, you have to be cautious with this approach. In case you have not made your other processes robust, your managers are not competent and work assignment is not clearly laid out and you do not have a committed work force (which comes by instilling these values in them through you), such freedom will backfire on you. If employees do not know what they are supposed to do, what is their focus, and now they are not in an office environment slowly they will drift away from your team and organisation completely. And they will become strangers. They may also find more time to look outside and find other jobs since its not just money people need from jobs, they need fulfillment and feeling of achievements. This is one of the reason, i hear from many leaders that giving more freedom to their employee does not work for them. Some say it does not work in so and so geography. To me, its all about how well your organisation and processes are laid and only when these are laid with certain level of maturity such freedom to employees will give you immense output and productivity. 

When work is not organized well, leaders will feel more in control when people are coming to physical offices and are physically present. However, its more like you are getting 10-20% of the total outcome from your people. If you work on laying down solid processes and align people with right roles and responsibility and then you impart such freedom your productivity can really get multifold. 

A small team of 10 individual can produce immense value. In order to unlock this value you need to provide the right environment to this team and this environment is of high trust and empowerments coupled with right business objectives, processes and individual capable of driving such a team. 




 


